hey I get questions from time to time
and I just got another question today
asking me about veganism in terms of a
utopian project in terms of the
objectives of veganism being utopia and
this is actually an issue that I feel I
have spoken about in the past although
perhaps it came up in passing and
perhaps the depth of my sincerity in the
matter wasn't really clear in contrast
to many of the over-the-top save the
world messages that some vegans
broadcast in contrast to the
revolutionary claims sometimes including
violent claims and terrorists type
claims that a lot of vegans indulge in
my pragmatic down-to-earth approach to
veganism instead insists on comparing it
to the struggle to abolish cigarette
smoking the use of tobacco and it is
interesting and significant that in the
history we've all lived through even if
you're only a teenager today you're old
enough to have seen some of the social
change surrounding this we haven't
abolished cigarette smoking by making
cigarettes illegal by some kind of
sudden or violent overnight change
there's certainly nothing utopian about
it there's nothing revolutionary about
it but step-by-step cultural attitudes
have changed personal habits have
changed and scientific research and its
findings have become more and more
broadly understood and taken more and
more seriously the morality of smoking
cigarettes the cultural consensus on
that has shifted indescribably and
dramatically in the space of a hundred
years even in the last fifty years so
much has changed for a pregnant woman to
smoke cigarettes is now considered evil
and there are good scientific reasons
for that but actually the science was
already established basically around
World War two it took a very long time
for that to become widely understood
accepted and kind of appropriate into
the culture as something people care
about the perception that as a smoker
you are a bad person is now very real
there's a stigma attached to it
I'm sure many smokers suffer for that
reason like I don't say that without
some sympathy more and more jobs now if
you want to smoke cigarettes well you
definitely can't smoke in the office you
probably can't smoke anywhere in the
office building you've got to go
downstairs and go outside you can just
barely manage to smoke while holding
down the job and your employer isn't
supposed to fire you for being a smoker
that would be unfair discrimination but
probably everyone's looking at you funny
when you disappear for 15 minutes and
you weren't really supposed to be having
a break but you felt you need to
cigarette it's a drag and I'll if
society step by step is more and more
heavily slanted against tobacco
consumption and meanwhile it hasn't
disappeared I just checked the stats for
making this video in Canada where I
happened to be living the rate of
smoking has dropped over the last five
years approximately from twenty one
percent to about eighteen percent so
it's not a sudden or dramatic change
some of that change is just because
older people who smoke cigarettes are
dying of old age and some of is because
younger people are actually making the
effort to quit smoking I have no reason
to think that that will ever reach zero
percent and even if it did reserve
percent that wouldn't be a utopia that
wouldn't be a revolution that wouldn't
be anything else but on a really deep
level of cultural values how do you feel
if your daughter tells you she's got a
new boyfriend and she wants to get
married to him and he's a chain smoker
whether it's fair or unfair you probably
regard that as a bad thing and you may
be biased and regard him as a bad guy
simply because he smokes or maybe the
first thing you notice about him the
first thing you learn about him is that
he's a chain smoker he's smoking all the
time same with the genders reverse if
it's your son who's got a new girlfriend
and he tells you hey I want you to meet
my girlfriend we're gonna get married
but first thing you see is that she's a
chain smoker this has a powerful social
significance a moral value attached to
it
that it didn't have it all 100 years ago
this has changed and to some extent all
of us have witnessed the change and even
though there have been you know changes
in government policy changes in laws
changes in the way to back oh it's
packaged and sold I think the most
profound and important change is at that
level of ethics and of cultural values
surrounding the ethical decisions we
make I did already use this one example
in an earlier video today even if you
smoke yourself you do not want your
children to smoke you're not proud if
your son and daughter start smoking even
if you yourself are still a smoker it's
a huge and fundamental change and it's
very difficult to imagine that within my
lifetime you would see a lot of people
already say well you know I still eat
meat I still eat beef I still eat bacon
but I recognize it's not good for my
health I recognize it's not good
ethically recognize it's not good at
illogically and I'm not really happy to
see my kids picking up the same bad
habits i had that would be meat-eating
coming into the same realm of questions
as cigarette smoking etc and again so i
just mentioned cigarette smoking canada
dropping down to eighteen percent of the
population it's quite possible that it's
going to reach some kind of stasis at
maybe ten percent maybe it'll never drop
below ten percent of the population
maybe there will always be a minority of
people who are smoking tobacco despite
this kind of stigma it carries
ultimately I'm comfortable with that I'm
comfortable living in a society where
people the freedom to choose to smoke
tobacco because we all know the reality
is all the people around us have the
freedom to use cocaine heroin and so on
even though they are illegal right heavy
questions but for me this is very far
removed from utopia ironically by the
way I'm currently in the running to go
and deliver an academic paper at
International Conference on thomas
more's utopia on the philosophy of
utopia on utopianism in the strictest
sense as a philosophy and as an asst
phenomenon I don't know if I'm going to
be able to go to that academic
conference or not nice to be invited as
they say at the Oscars nice to be
nominated um so I do not think of
veganism in these utopian terms and I
would warn anyone who thinks of utopian
utopian fantasies very positively some
people imagine that a utopian vision for
the future is a good thing because it
motivates people to cooperate to work
together that unified unifies people
with diverse interests and I've got to
tell you the exact opposite is true give
you a real quick example if I put
together a coalition here at my
university of all kinds of different
people who think it's immoral to carry
out vivisection on Apes because I find
out there are some monkeys with
experiments being performed on them here
at the University so we're all different
people but what unifies us what makes us
work together bring this complaint to
university board of directors to the
Dean to the provost and to Parliament to
the government maybe we do some protests
or whatever it is what unifies us is our
moral concern over this that group is
going to include some people who support
vivisection on rats but not on Apes it's
going to probably the majority people
were really interested will be science
students in that department who are not
vegan and you don't share my values but
praxis is what unifies us political
praxis the actual difference you can
make is what unifies us now if we get
into utopian visions of the future like
what would you do when the revolution
comes then we r divided much more deeply
then all of a sudden were fragmented
into a whole bunch of different
ideologies that are not concerned with
what can be accomplished here and now
but are instead concerned with something
hypothetical in the far-off future um I
actually had more to say on this subject
but I'm going to try to wrap this up
right quick be great to have a video
less than ten minutes long on this
channel for a change revolutionary
change is not the most important kind of
change in this world many of the most
profound and important changes in human
has
have not been revolutionary in any way
including for example the Industrial
Revolution that we only describe as a
revolution for that reason because it's
so important but there's really nothing
revolutionary about it the other thing
to remember is as veganism moves closer
towards that goal of just making meat
and dairy carry some stigma for these
reasons to be somehow in the same
category of cigarette smoking then we're
also going to see the mainstreaming of
veganism in the same way that you know
if you were really a big fan of the Lord
of the Rings books before it got made
into a movie you would suddenly feel
confused and disappointed with all these
people getting involved once the movie
is released who weren't interested in it
before if you are reading the books for
Game of Thrones song of ice and fire and
then the TV show happens maybe you're
happy that it becomes mainstream more
people are involved but also now you're
going to the same conferences and
they're all these other people there who
weren't like the people the movement
isn't now what it used to be veganism
will also go through these sorts of
growing pains